
---
title: "Clouds"
date: "2012-08-25T13:02:00-04:00"
draft: false
---

While I'm sure everyone here is aware of "Cloud" being used to describe online services, or rebrand existing products, not all of it is marketing fluff. There still is a lot of ambiguity, and a few companies set out to define the term themselves rather than repeat the same blather. Three service models have arrived from those efforts which I will attempt to explain here. Wikipedia predictably has a [good article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infrastructure_as_a_service#Service_models) on the subject too, but it is laden with computer jargon that may be difficult for non-technical people to parse... err... understand.

You can think of these models as a stack, each one building upon the other. At the bottom are <strong>Infrastructure-as-a-Service</strong> clouds, the iconic example is Amazon's <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_EC2">Elastic Compute Cloud</a> (EC2). Other companies like IBM and Rackspace offer IaaS clouds too. Users of these request resources (the "infrastructure") in the form of CPUs, Memory (RAM), disk space and others. They do not actually get hardware dedicated to them; all of these resources are emulated. If you can imagine a giant computer with a tens of thousands of CPUs and Petabytes (meg, gig, tera, peta...) of space, try to conceive of a system that is smart enough to intelligently split up those resources. Some user gets only 2 CPUs and 16G of memory, another gets 32 CPUs and 128G and so on.

Often the resource values a user asks for are not exposed directly. You don't say, "I want 12G of RAM". Instead, in the case of EC2, you request a "Small" or "Large" system. There are many different sizes available there, and they all are suitable for different workloads: some trade off memory for more CPU power and vice-versa. IaaS clouds are useful because the user does not need to worry about buying expensive hardware, you just "lease" it from the cloud provider. There are all manor billing models for IaaS clouds: dollar-per-hour of uptime, Megabits/Second of network activity, or Gigabytes of space.

You specify the operating system in a similar manor. Would you like Windows or Linux? (sorry no Mac support in any clouds I am aware of) The systems are not installed when you make a request though, that would not really be practical. Instead, they already exist on a disk somewhere already set up and ready to go. When you request a "Medium" Linux system you end up with a Linux installation that has smartly identified the resources available to it and booted up with them available to you. Briefly as an aside, the Red Hat Enterprise Linux installations available on EC2 were built and released by me, which is sort of a career highlight so far.

A <strong>Platform as a Service</strong> (PaaS) model is the next level up. When a user is working with one of these, rather than requesting resources like RAM, you request software frameworks (the "platforms") to develop on. Let's use an example: you want to build a website. Websites need a database (such as mongo, mysql or postgres), a web server (such as apache), and a language (python, java, or php) if you want it to look like something modern. On a PaaS cloud you'll request all of those things and be presented with an interface where you can develop your website with them. Services like this are attractive because you, the user, do not need to be concerned with the maintenance of the software frameworks you need. The cloud provider will handle keeping the database up to date and the applying today's critical php security patch. In a future post I will describe my first experiences moving Brolem content to Openshift.

PaaS cloud providers handle the infrastructure too, usually building on top of an IaaS. Therefore, the end user for a PaaS cloud does not need to worry about hardware or software maintenance, they just handle the development of the application or website itself. <a href="https://openshift.redhat.com/app/">Openshift</a> is Red Hat's offering in this space, the obvious competitors are <a href="http://www.heroku.com/">Heroku</a> and Microsoft's <a href="http://www.windowsazure.com/en-us/">Azure</a>

Similar to IaaS clouds, PaaS offerings usually simplify the terminology behind requesting resources. If you need a platform that includes a webserver that can handle thousands of concurrent requests, you'll requisition that by asking for more "Gears" in Openshift, or more "Dynos" in Heroku. In a very simplified and broad sense, these terms just mean "more power".

The last model is <strong>Software as a Service</strong> (SaaS). This term is meant to describe services you can use that have a cloud backing. They're the consumer-level clouds. iTunes or Salesforce are the clear examples. When you buy a song from iTunes, all of your devices will get it because they're all talking to the same cloud service.

SaaS clouds from a user's perspective are not anything really new. We've all be using websites for years that have always fit into the SaaS model. The term still serves as a categorization more than a real software innovation.
