
---
title: "Dark Souls"
date: "2011-10-15T12:47:00-04:00"
draft: false
---

[Dark Souls](http://www.preparetodie.com/en/) is the successor to <a href="http://www.demons-souls.com/">Demons' Souls</a>, not in the sense of a sequel though, just heavily inspired. Both of these games were well-received for their depth and difficulty.

The difficulty is the most well known characteristic of the game though. You cannot button-mash this game; it will punish you severely for it. There is no compass, no map, and a very sparse explanation of how things work. Every enemy in this game, even the lowly ones you encounter at the beginning, can and will remove large amounts of your health if you're not careful. If it looks like getting hit by a giant's colossal club will kill you in one shot, it probably will. There are traps, ambushes and pitfalls all over the place. There is even a Curse status affect that, if you die from it, you come back with your health capacity <strong>halved</strong> until you get the curse removed.

Sound fun? Depends on your definition. You do not play for story, dialogue or intrigue... they're mostly non-existent. It's an action RPG the way they should be designed. I'm beginning to think that the reason Dark Souls was so well received is because everyone playing it knows what they're in for: they likely played the predecessor. 10 minutes into the game you'll encounter a boss that you cannot defeat, it teaches you that running away is ok; you'll do it a lot. Unlike Demons' Souls, this game is an open world; you can wander wherever you want. The drawback though, is that if you wander to the tougher areas (and there is rarely any indication you are; everything looks dangerous), enemies there will flatten you easily until you learn to try a different path.

You cannot arbitrarily save in this game, so a key mechanic in Dark Souls are the Bonfires. They're checkpoints of sorts that you sit at to level up, change spells, access inventory, repair, upgrade items, and refill your Estus Flask. The latter thing is basically a multi-use health potion. The catch though, is that when you sit at a Bonfire, all non-boss monsters respawn. So if you're out of resources on your way somewhere, you could go back and recuperate, but then you'd also be undoing all of your work.

The soul mechanic is also a well known design decision in these games. When you kill monsters, or loot treasure, you'll be rewarded Souls. They function as both Experience (this is an RPG), and currency to buy things. The catch though is that if you die, you leave your souls on your corpse. When you return at a bonfire, you need to go recover them. But if you die on your way, then the souls on your most recent corpse are available, but the earlier body disappears forever. This is easily the most stress-inducing mechanic. When you die with a pile of souls, the pressure is on for you to tip-toe your way back without dying. If you do, chances are you've just undone an hour's worth of game time.

One piece of advice: it is easy to obsess over perfect stats and items, since the difficulty is high, but I learned that if you make a mistake with your character development, you can usually still recover. If you spent a bunch of items on a boss and ended up dying, you can still buy more somewhere in the game, you just need to spend time farming the souls you need. All of the character classes are just starting points. If you create a sorcerer and keep dumping points into the Strength and Endurance stats, eventually you'll wear plate with the best of them. You may have a tougher time in the beginning, but you can turn your character into other classes if you want to, as long as you've got the time to keep farming you can do whatever you want.

Let me expound on <em>fun</em> again though. It is of course a subjective term, but I think it would be more accurate to say one would play this game for <em>satisfaction</em>, not fun. It is not fun to get killed in one shot by a trap you didn't know was there, or you did not know the correct move to perform when a boss appeared to be charging up a powerful attack. The same sort of reinforcement can be said of other games: Super Meat Boy is enormously frustrating at times. Play the "Puberty" level from the Expert Remix pack to learn why it took me 2.5 hours to successfully complete a level in 34 seconds. But if you go in the right expectation, you'll forgive the game for being so brutish in its teaching methods, and when you finally do slay one of the games relentless bosses, you'll be immensely satisfied with yourself.

While the manual and in-game tutorial, if you can call it that, are very terse the game actually has quite a bit of depth to it. You have to purchase items, spells, and item upgrades (which require other items) to stay afloat in this game. Each monster type (and there are a lot) has many attacks you'll have to get familiar with. There are <em>covenants</em> you can join that have their own rules you'll have to play by, else you risk getting your name in the Book of the Guilty and being branded a Sinner, which has its own risks.

Ironically, Dark Souls is deteriorating my interest in other games. The combat is very engaging and challenging and it makes sense. If you're trying to kill something by swinging a great-sword in a narrow hallway, it won't take you long to learn why that is a bad idea. You know what series has always had poor combat mechanics? The Elder Scrolls. I sincerely hope Skyrim offers more than spamming fireballs or incessant left-clicking to wave your sword around until the bad guy clipping through your shield is dead, otherwise I might skip it. There's been a couple combat encounters where after they were over I thought to myself, "this is really making other games I've played seem bad by comparison".

Like Demons' Souls, the multiplayer aspect continues to innovate. It feels like a single player game, but you can seamlessly get involved with other players when you want to. You can summon others to your game to help, or let yourself to be summoned and together you'll tag along to make progress. You can also invade other players' games or be invaded yourself. The idea is to kill the other player in this context. However, there is certain criteria to be met to do any of these things: you'll spend items and souls, and you risk losing a lot more whenever you do.

Players can also leave notes around the world that you can read. Often they give some advice about a trap or upcoming boss, or they could be trolling; you can't always tell. If a player dies, they'll leave behind a blood pool you can interact with to see the last 8 or so seconds of their life replayed in your world. This may give you a clue about what is coming up. While all this is going on, you rarely see other players walking around. It's not a persistent world of players like an MMO, you'll just catch glimpses of their spirits wondering around and fighting. It serves very well to keep you isolated and in suspense, but yet there is a community you can tap into if you need it. It's not like there is a trade channel with a 14 year old talking about your mother's sexual preferences.

To summarize, I am loving this game. I've put about 25 hours into it so far, and I have no idea how far along I am. I've already been thinking of what class to try next. I've already decided to put off Skyrim, Diablo 3 and the next Zelda, if I get them at all. So many times I have had to admit to myself that I've been playing the wrong games. If you're ready for punishing trial-and-error that leads to satisfying game play and discovery, I encourage you to pick up a copy.
