
---
title: "Divinity: Original Sin"
date: "2014-10-12T14:21:00-04:00"
draft: false
---

Muffin and I have put around 60 hours into [Divinity: Original Sin](http://www.divinityoriginalsin.com/), so I figure it is about time for a review. Born from a very successful Kickstarter campaign, Divinity gives players a taste of Baldur's Gate might have been like if it was released in 2014. For an "indie" game, it is pretty well designed and polished, except for a few spots which I'll get into later. We have found the whole package a lot of fun and strongly recommend it.

I want this to be positive review, so I hope you'll permit me a subtle psychological manipulation: I'm going to go through the bad stuff first. The game has lots of choices and interesting dialogue, but so much of it is reduced to only 2 choices. I don't mean the whole game is a deus ex machina kind of thing, I man a dozen or so side quests end with you choosing something like "kill that guy" or "let that guy go free". In many cases the characters in your party will converse with you, and you'll only get 2 responses to pick from, each of which will be definitively agreeing or disagreeing on the subject at hand. It's not a big deal, some times I wish there was another option.

The music is good, but unremarkable, and I suppose that fits classic RPGs so maybe that was intentionally designed. The voice acting is great, but a lot of the canned greetings you get when you initiate dialogue ("Hello! Back again?") are repetitive. Sometimes they're even used in silly places like when you're conversing with a cat. This is minor stuff though.

The main quest markers only sometimes show up on the main map, and sometimes stay there permanently. I'm not really sure what is up with that, but you really need to read the quest logs to figure out where to go next. The game always gives you clues, but they're easy to miss or forget if you stop playing the game for a week. In once case we found a forcefield that required a "6 sided object" to pass, but neither of us remembered that we picked up a hexagonal necklace (according to the inventory icon) the week before. There are no side quest markers at all, which I actually prefer in a game. Divinity does not hold your hand, especially in combat, which I'll go into in detail next.

Combat is turn based and slow to resolve, but each turn you get involves weighing a lot of options carefully. The world is very interactive, and contains a lot of subtleties that take some practice to get used to.  For example, when it is raining, all characters get the "wet" status affect, which makes them more susceptible to freezing and cold-based attacks. Conversely, standing near lava or a campfire makes you "warm". Poison gas clouds can be detonated with fire spells, and electrical attacks can charge pools of liquid briefly, including your own blood if you've been standing still somewhere with the "bleed" status effect.

For once in a game, status effects and damage types actually matter! I'm not sure why, but this is something that has irked me in many modern games. In Borderlands for example, you get hit by half a dozen types of damage, but that can be completely ignored even in the 3rd play through. In Divinity, you can be knocked down, stunned, or frozen, and these all have the same effect (your turn is skipped for 1-3 rounds), but different resistances and spells can get you out of them. You can also be burning, poisoned, cursed, slowed, crippled, weakened and probably several others I am forgetting. Combat really feels meaningful in this game and not just a grind; you do not have to slog through a bunch of random encounters to discover something interesting. Monsters do not respawn anywhere, though there are summon spells so they do spawn once in some places. 

Combat has a lot of tactics to it that take some time to get comfortable with. Early on a character gets a teleport spell that lets you pick up and drop a character to deal damage. The basic attack just moves an enemy to another location and deals damage, but you can also drop them on other enemies to damage them too. Or, if they're on fire, drop them on a barrel of oil for even better results. Or drop them in front of your rogue who goes next turn for some back-stabbin'. If an enemy is suffering from a bleed effect, you can freeze their blood on the ground, which may make them trip and fall when they move on their turn. Open combat with a rain storm, and then use a blizzard to freeze half of your enemies on the spot. Use invisibility and haste spell prior to combat on a rogue to start things off with ridiculous back-stab damage. I could write paragraphs of this. The combat is really great.

It has a certain humor about it too, which I was not prepared for but once expectations were set I became ok with it. For example, a bunch of bad guys are killing wildlife and if you're fast and efficient enough you can save a boar. If you have the trait where you can speak to animals, it will say it can lead you to wonderful treasure. That treasure turns out to be a bunch of mushrooms, which the boar will happily eat. Another example is a chest that leaps away from you whenever you try to open it. We opened it with fireballs; maybe there was more to the solution than that but we'll never know now.

The cooperative aspect of the game is one of the best I have had in a long time. There should be 4 members in your party, and when someone joins your game, you can assign any number of characters under their control. They act completely independent of you. They can be in dialogue or combat while you're off doing something else, but you need to be on the same map. If you want to listen in on dialogue, you just click on the character and you'll see the dialogue interface and the speech options they are choosing. There are several occasions where you can pick one dialogue option, and then another character is given the same question and similar options. If they pick something that opposes what you said, a rock-paper-scissors kind of game starts to see which option the party goes with. With Muffin playing an altruistic spellcaster and me as the rogue, sometimes the role-playing can be its own reward.

One memorable scene was when her character (via perception) saw my character stealing artwork from the mayor's house, and a dialogue between us about that started outside the front door. Another one was when I sold a rain storm spell (why would a rogue need that?) to a vendor in town, and then later in the game Muffin put out a burning ship with it. When I asked where she got the spell, she had bought it from the same vendor I sold it to.

Oh, the game comes with an editor too, so maybe there will be a Neverwinter-Nights sort of mod community for this. I have not played with it yet myself or done much investigation, but I expect to after finishing the game because it is that good.
