
---
title: "Game Atmosphere Case Study"
date: "2009-09-18T10:56:00-04:00"
draft: false
---

Many of us carry on about current generation games failing to provide an immersive setting or atmosphere, despite improvements in graphics, sound, and gameplay. While there may be something to be said about our long experience playing video games, perhaps related to desensitization, I would like to offer a study on a game I've been (re-)playing lately that continues to deliver a compelling atmospheric gaming experience: STALKER: Shadow of Chernobyl. (SoC)

The original game was realized in 2007 with many, many bugs and flaws. Since then however the development studio has issued 4 patches that fix most of the major issues. While they do improve the game experience as a whole, the atmosphere is greatly improved by a collection of 3rd party fan-made modifications. These mods are freely available, and indeed easy to install, since one fan as taken the time to collect the best mods together into a single mod package. This case study will examine a fully patched game using this mod pack. Specifically, two aspects of the modded SoC will be explored: the atmosphere it aims to achieve, and how the gameplay supports it.

The game aims to be well grounded in reality, in a believable setting with some sci-fi elements including mutants and broad-reaching government coverups. SoC is a very open game: granting players the freedom to explore the vast world above ground during the day or night, and to explore underground ruins and abandoned government facilities. Certainly at night and in the underground settings there is a very clear atmosphere set up that we are very familiar with: suspense and horror, but I will mention that in passing since that isn't the focus. The atmosphere I want to focus on is exemplified in this game the best; and the only word I can think of to describe accurately it is "desolation".

You are very much alone and a small part of the game word. The word is large and unforgiving, and you can royally ruin yourself if you do not make the right decisions in game. There are other modern games that can be characterized by saying they have a feeling of desolation such as Fallout 3. Let me begin by describing why I think SoC does such a great job making you feel desolate, and contrast it with design decisions of Fallout 3, which I feel does not have a desolate atmosphere at all.

In SoC, there are many factors you need to manage. Ammo and Health are of course at the forefront, like in many Shooters that came before it. But there is also food, armor and a simple inventory system where you have to manage weight and space. The open world is very large, and getting from point A to point B can be quite a long endeavor. At it's most distant places, it can take a few hours to cross the world and stay in a good situation; there is no fast-travel.

Players can only carry 50kg worth of equipment; this includes weapons, armor, food, powerups, ammo, and other items. Exceeding the limit will cause your character to be less able to run, and grossly exceeding it will limit their walking ability, greatly impacting combat ability and performance. To give you some idea, you can carry around 600 rounds of ammo for a large rife, or 30 medical kits if you need to, just not at the same time assuming you have other essentials.

The game is objective based, so whenever the player is going to venture to a different locale, several factors come into play: the day and night cycle, weather, the type of enemies you will encounter, and the terrain you plan to cross. I need to go on a tangent about nightfall in this game: it's dark. This isn't like we just wash the screen with blue hues. See the screenshots on the side. I suppose you could crank the gamma if you were a fag, but even the mod designers recommended against that. Night really matters in this game. What's cool is that traveling at night is easier when you're passing through human controlled territory, because they cannot see. But if you're crossing areas with mutants, you better stock up well. Especially if you're in Bloodsucker territory.

Anyway, since it takes at least several minutes to get from point A to B, the decision of what to take with you becomes very important, because if you make the wrong decisions, suddenly your gaming experience will be very... poor. If you run out of food, you'll take massive penalties and ultimately die if not nourished in time. But carrying too much will make combat harder since you cannot move or escape easily. The balance of too little or too much ammo and health supplies needs no explanation since the ramifications are obvious.

This decision-making is what makes the player (me) feel so alone. The game is unforgiving for grossly ignoring this aspect of the gameplay. If you don't bring enough ammo and run into a big firefight, the rest of your journey will suck, and you'll have to invest quite a bit of time finishing that journey or perhaps starting the whole of it over again. Chosing to wear light armor when you know you'll encounter heavy resistance heading through a military base is a terrible idea and you should be punished for it. The treks across the country-side at night often lack any contact with friendly NPCs. This is made worse if it happens to be raining. And even when you do find someone, and feel a moment of relief, they speak to you in Russian (it is a Russian made game; main quest dialogue is translated though). Sometimes NPCs will shoo you away (possibly with hostility), refusing you supplies you may desperately need. There are no NPCs in this game that will travel with you for more than a few minutes. Several other graphical and sound elements support the atmosphere too such as gusty winds and animal calls.

Now a few words about saving your game. You can save your game arbitrarily, but because the trek to get to your next objective requires so much game time, it is difficult to always make the right choices about when to save your game. Sometimes you'll run into a monster that takes a lot of hits to go down, and you'll save your game once you've killed it successfully, but now you've used up some ammo. If you played through that part of your journey again, maybe you wouldn't have run into it in the first place, and thus have that ammo. Compound many encounters like that together and you can see why it isn't always easy to know if you should save your game. Note that cascading saves (not overwriting the same file each time) does mitigate this somewhat, and indeed to some extent that is necessary: sometimes you do need to start your journey over again because you didn't supply up properly.

The game's content is greatly influenced by chance: a cache of weapons you find laying around may not be there if you reload. Or maybe enemies will change. Additionally, very little of the game world is explained to the player at the start of the game. The only way a player can really learn about the environment is to explore, and that of course carries risk because you're expending resources to do so hoping you'll find a reward tucked away under some rock.

Fallout 3, I argue, does not have a desolate atmosphere. The reason is because that kind of atmosphere is utterly destroyed by the idea of fast travel. The choices you make in how to arm yourself, what to carry and where to go is are rendered inconsequential because at any time when you are not in combat, you can instantaneously travel back to a city to resupply. You make no long term decisions in that game. You also find friendly NPCs, and they are obviously friendly. You gather teammates and fight with them. They also speak English; you'd be surprised how welcome that would be sometimes in SoC.

Freelancer is another game that feels desolate to me when I'm not playing with you guys. Space is vast and unexplored, and you don't really know what the game can throw at you for sure. You can only hope you brought enough shield bots and repair thingies to survive out there, particularly when you're a couple systems away from civilization. Again, you have to spend a lot of time and investments in completing an objective or just for exploration. When I'm exploring the fringe systems (the ones with alien ships, did you know there were aliens in that game? I'm not talking mods here...), you feel inextricably alone and separated from society. And then 12 Mollies appear on radar.

What makes SoC so great is that while one-hit-kill gameplay exists, it only exists if you're making bad decisions (generally, see my comment below). Maybe this atmosphere isn't for everyone, but I really enjoy it, and I keep coming back to this game to get it. The sequel has it to some extent as well, but the fans really did a good job modding up the first. The 3rd in the series comes out later this year.

