
---
title: "HOPE 2014"
date: "2014-08-03T14:19:00-04:00"
draft: false
---

A few weekends ago I was in New Your City attending the [10th HOPE conference](http://www.hope.net/about.html), which is short for Hackers on Planet Earth. I enjoyed this one more than the last DefCons I've been to (17 and 20), and I want to share why.

DefCon is very much about the technology, and the scene. Presenters are comfortable being informal and provocative with their content. It's cool to be a hacker, and fuck anyone that says otherwise! While entertaining and enlightening, I don't think DefCon is really for me any more. I'll still recommend it to any of my computer-savvy friends, eveyone should go to at least one, but when I leave that conference, I'm often just disappointed that the current state of software is where it is at today. It is really an insecure mess. There are people trying to do something about it, but that's not the focus at this conference, it is about how we break it more. Let's laugh at vendors trying to sell security. Also, I just don't care about dressing like a cyberpunk.

HOPE on the other hand is more laid back and political. Looking back, I'm not sure when I started caring about politics in technology, but lately I've been more and more observant. HOPE acknowledges the state of affairs but also points out what can be done to improve it.

The theme this year was dissent generated from the NSA leaks; there is a lot to be upset about if you're paying attention. I brought it up with my wife a few days ago and the extent of her understanding was that phone metadata was being collected, and she just didn't find that to be a big deal. I didn't object to that observation, but I was motivated to explain some of the other things that I think are a big deal, particularly around bulk surveillance. I may put up future posts that aggregate what the leaks revealed, and where people are doing something about it, if anything can be done.

The keynote at HOPE X was a conversation between Daniel Ellsberg and Edward Snowden, who appeared via an anonymous tunnel from somewhere in Russia. Ellsberg leaked the Pentagon Papers in 1971 and was there in person. They both commended each other and thanked each other for several minutes, and then explained how to solve the problem of government overreach. Both agreed that some things should remain secret, but far too much is considered secret when it should not be. Ellsberg chastised current government agents for standing by and not doing the right thing: blowing whistles when shenanigans are going on. Snowden was a little more nuanced: he suggested to the audience that they make it easier to whistleblow, and not so much of a risk to the person. Snowden is likely going to be an exile for the rest of his life. Other whistleblowers were jailed for life.

It was the most interesting conference keynote I have attended to date. I've been to many for corporations and industry announcements, but never to one where the conversation was about the direction the country is headed and held between two "heroes". And I do think they are heroes; risking the rest of your life for a conviction to a transparent government is heroic, in my opinion.

I likely will go to HOPE XI in 2016. In the meantime, my current resolution is to get off my butt and see if there is more I can be doing about bulk surveillance and government overreach. I'm not talking about anything unlawful, just getting the message out without sounding like a crackpot. I'll see if I can get more involved with privacy advocate groups and efforts to make leaking documents less of a risk to a person.
